gh-96168: Add sqlite3 row factory how-to (#99507)
python/cpython: Doc/library/sqlite3.rst

   .. attribute:: row_factory

>       Define the default :attr:`Cursor.row_factory`
>       for cursors created off of this connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The default :attr:`~Cursor.row_factory`
      for :class:`Cursor` objects created from this connection.
```

* Using a verb like "Define" makes it sound like this is a callable rather than an attribute, so I suggest eliding it.
* I'd suggest omitting the class here and adding explicit markup to the `Cursor` mention following it, as it reads better to me and avoids redundancy
* IMO, "from" rather than "off of" is a little clearer at representing the relationship here

Author: Totally agree on every point. That reads much better; thanks.

      Assigning to this attribute does not affect the :attr:`!row_factory`

>       of open cursors belonging to this connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      of existing cursors belonging to this connection, only new ones.
```

* Explicitly contrast with what it _does_ affect
* Tweak wording slightly to be more precise (as I understand it, whether the cursor is affected depends on whether the cursor has already been created, not whether `close()` has been called on it as this would imply) and avoid unnecessary confusion (readers might not necessarily be familiar with open/`close()` semantics, whereas simple existence is much more basic and obvious)

Author: +1

> [...] as I understand it, whether the cursor is affected depends on whether the cursor has already been created, not whether close() has been called on it as this would imply [...]

This is correct.

Author: However, I find the _"only new ones"_ a little bit weird. I'll try to come up with an alternative.

Author: Let's keep "only new ones" for now. If people are confused about it, we can change it later.

>       Is ``None`` by default.

Reviewer: At least to me it feels a bit odd to mention the default value, but not what the default value actually does. But I'm not totally sure what to do about it—omit it, leave it, briefly mention the default behavior, or something else. Thoughts?

Author: I think expanding it slightly is the best option. Perhaps something like _"Is None by default, which implies no row factory is set"_, but I'm not particularly keen on that one either.

Author: ```suggestion
      Is ``None`` by default,
      meaning a fetched row is returned as a :class:`tuple`.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Is ``None`` by default.
      meaning each row is returned as a :class:`tuple`.
```

Sounds good, though IMO, it's simpler to omit the "fetched" since that's a detail of its usage/operation.

      a :class:`Cursor` object and the raw row results as a :class:`tuple`,
      and returns a custom object representing an SQLite row.

      If returning a tuple doesn't suffice and you want name-based access to

>       columns, you should consider setting :attr:`row_factory` to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      If returning a tuple doesn't suffice
      and name-based access to columns is needed,
      :attr:`row_factory` can be set to the
```

IMO, it might be best to avoid the use of "you" and directly telling the reader what to do in the Reference docs, as opposed to simply impartially stating information.

Author: True, true

>       highly optimized :class:`sqlite3.Row`

Author: Something is off here. Let's try this.

```suggestion
      highly optimized :class:`sqlite3.Row` row factory.
```

Reviewer 2: What about `class`?  The doc said `type` before, and this sentence is already talking about row factories.

Author: Yeah, that may be better.

Reviewer: Sure. In any case, it fixes the missing period (full stop).

>       See :ref:`sqlite3-row-factory-how-to` for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   See :ref:`sqlite3-howto-row-factory` for more details.
```

See rationale in ref target label definition

      a :class:`Cursor` object and the raw row results as a :class:`tuple`,

>       and returns a custom object representing an SQLite row.

Reviewer: A couple additional points you might want to mention here:

* While the details are deferred to the how-to, IMO this should at least state explicitly what this attribute actually does/is used for (to return a custom object instead of a tuple when (iterating through?) DB rows). (Implemented in suggestion below)
* Also, this doesn't explicitly mention what it is set to by default and how to restore the default behavior. (Implemented in suggestion below)
* You might want to include at least a brief mention of the relationship between this and the `row_factory` on each cursor

Author: Yep. I just re-read the two row factory attr paragraphs, and I completely agree with your points here (and in your [previous comment](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/99507#discussion_r1025410397)). I'll have to sleep on what to write, though. I'll try to come back with something tomorrow.

      If returning a tuple doesn't suffice
      and name-based access to columns is needed,

>       :attr:`row_factory` can be set to the

Reviewer: Re-reading this, the text isn't very clear here, and it is potentially confusing what "If returning a tuple doesn't suffice" refers to—returning a tuple from what? When? Where? And how does that relate to custom factories mentioned above?

Combining this with the first two suggestions above, reorganizing the order to state the purpose before delving into the technical details, deferring more to the `sqlite3.Row` documentation to describe that, and linking callable to the glossary term, among other tweaks, you could replace the current attribute description (minus the SeeAlso) with the following:

```rst
      Set to :class:`sqlite3.Row` or a custom :term:`callable`
      to return a type other than the default :class:`tuple` for each row,
      which can be restored by setting this to back to ``None``.
      Must accept two arguments,
      a :class:`Cursor` object and the raw row results as a :class:`!tuple`,
      and return a custom object representing an SQLite row.
```

Author: Yes, this is an improvement. I'll base my suggestion off of that.

Author: This is a difficult one. Without even getting into the default value, and the specs of the callable, this is a verbose description of what the (connection) row factory is:

_The connection row factory defines how rows fetched from SQL queries executed on cursors created off of this connection are represented. The connection row factory propagates to `:attr:Cursor.row_factory` upon cursor creation, but changes to `:attr:Connection.row_factory` does not affect the `row_factory` of open cursors (created off of this connection)._

Clearly, we cannot spell it out like this. Perhaps we should keep the callable specs where they are, and then explain the intricacies of how this attribute actually works. Perhaps it is easier to write the bulk of the text in the Cursor row factory reference and refer to that from the Connection row factory reference?

      for :class:`Cursor` objects created from this connection.
      Assigning to this attribute does not affect the :attr:`!row_factory`
      of existing cursors belonging to this connection, only new ones.
      Is ``None`` by default,

>       meaning each row is returned as a :class:`tuple`.

Reviewer 3: I think this paragraph can be improved:
* There are two "default" mentioned, which might be confusing;
* The last sentence is missing the subject.

I would drop the first "default" and rephrase the last sentence -- possibly the whole paragraph.
Maybe something along the lines of:
```rst
Callables assigned to this attribute will be used 
for :class:`Cursor` objects created from this connection.
Assigning to this attribute does not affect the :attr:`!row_factory`
of existing cursors belonging to this connection, only new ones.
The default value is ``None``,
meaning each row is returned as a :class:`tuple`.
```

You might tweak the `text_factory` description to mimic this if it's also just an attribute set to `None` by default.

Reviewer: I see the concern with the first point, we should definitely avoid mentioning two "defaults" if at all practical.

I'm not sure about the specific proposed re-write, as it:

* Lacks a direct mention/link to the `Cursor.row_factory` attribute (where this is documented in more detail),
* Doesn't actually state explicitly and specifically what the attribute actually does ("used" how?), 
* Has something ("Callables...") other than the actual attribute being documented as the subject of its first sentence, which doesn't really match the wording of the others or my expectations reading API reference docs, and feels to me as if there's something missing

Instead, maybe just replace "default" with "initial", which is more specific and avoids the repetition/potential confusion while not running into the above issues?

I don't mind the second change if the current wording causes at least some ambiguity. Though, to note, dropping the subject in API reference docs when it is the object being documented, to keep the text more concise and less repetitive as is generally appropriate for Reference-type docs, appears to the rule rather than the exception for the attributes, etc. documented here.

Author: > There are two "default" mentioned, which might be confusing;

Yep, well observed.

> Instead, maybe just replace "default" with "initial", which is more specific and avoids the repetition/potential confusion while not running into the above issues?

Yes, and this is more accurate. The connection row factory does not "set" the default row factory of spun off cursors; it only sets the initial row factory. There is a slight difference in wording, IMO, and I definitely prefer "initial".

      including :abbr:`CTE (Common Table Expression)` queries.
      It is only updated by the :meth:`execute` and :meth:`executemany` methods.

   .. attribute:: row_factory

      Control how a row fetched from this :class:`!Cursor` is represented.

>       Set to :class:`sqlite3.Row` or a custom :term:`callable`
>       that accept two arguments,
>       a :class:`Cursor` object and the raw row results as a :class:`tuple`,
>       and return a custom object representing an SQLite row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Set to :class:`sqlite3.Row`;
      or a custom :term:`callable` that accepts two arguments,
      a :class:`Cursor` object and a :class:`tuple` of the raw row results,
      and returns a custom object representing an SQLite row.
```

I suggest tweaking the wording and syntax here to make clearer that the details on the arguments and return value is only directly applicable to the custom callable (since the user isn't passing or accepting the arguments to `sqlite.Row`, and it is returning a `Row` instance, rather than a generic "custom" object, which in the same sentence is explicitly contrasted with the `Row` class).

Also, I suggested rewording the `tuple` bit, since the previous wording was a bit ambiguous and required multiple passes to parse whether elements of the `tuple` were the `Cursor` object and a row results, or just the individual row results.

Author: SGTM

>       Set to :class:`sqlite3.Row`;
>       or a custom :term:`callable` that accepts two arguments,
>       a :class:`Cursor` object and a :class:`tuple` of the row results,
>       and returns a custom object representing an SQLite row.
>       If ``None``, a fetched row is represented as a :class:`tuple`.

Author: If we drop the `Row` part (it is a little bit cluttering, now that I re-read it), we can reorder things like this:

```suggestion
      If ``None``, a fetched row is represented as a :class:`tuple`.
      Set to a :term:`callable` that accepts two arguments,
      a :class:`Cursor` object and the :class:`!tuple` of row values,
      and returns a custom object representing an SQLite row.
```

Reviewer: I definitely like putting the default ``None`` case first.

IMO its still worth at least briefly mentioning it can also be set to the included `Row` class and linking it, since that seems likely to be a common use case and makes sure readers are aware they don't necessarily have to built their own custom class for this and can just drop in an existing class, if that suits their needs—otherwise, I imagine many who might otherwise find that useful might not read further to find that out, and a brief but explicit cross-reference can go a long way as a jumping off point.

The re-ordering also exposes a bit of ambiguity as to whether "Set to a XXX" is intended as an imperative, which is somewhat unusual as it lacks a conditional followup ("...to do YYY") which is just telling users to do something without a reason, or in the past tense, which isn't in fact the case.

Therefore, I suggest:

```suggestion
      If ``None``, each row is represented as a :class:`tuple`.
      Can be set to the included :class:`sqlite3.Row`;
      or a custom :term:`callable` that accepts two arguments,
      a :class:`Cursor` object and the :class:`!tuple` of row values,
      and returns a custom object representing an SQLite row.
```

Author: Yep, I agree on all points.

Author: We could perhaps drop "fetched" here as well: _"If None, a row is represented as a ..."_

Reviewer: Yup, updated the suggestion (FWIW)

>       If ``None``, a fetched row is represented as a :class:`tuple`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      If ``None``, a fetched row is represented as the raw :class:`tuple`.
```

The current wording sounded just a touch awkward to me given the repetition from the previous. Maybe this makes the connection clearer and acknowledges the relationship?

Author: Hm, no, this is misleading, and I now see that the previous "raw" is misleading: a custom converter may have transformed a "raw string" to a FooBar object before the row factory is invoked, so there is nothing "raw" about the row results anywhere.

Reviewer: Ah, okay—I was just using the same wording as previously used the describe the object passed to the row factory, as that (raw or otherwise) is what is returned directly if no custom row factory is set, no? In any case, that connection should be made clear, IMO.

Author: We could explain the "if None" case first, and then make the (raw) tuple connection when explaining the arg spec for custom row factories.

Author: Suggestion added here: https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/99507/files#r1030245938

Reviewer: That seems to generally make sense to me overall, and I was thinking I'd prefer the default behavior first; I'll take a closer look at your specific suggestion.

      Defaults to what :attr:`Connection.row_factory` was set to

>       upon :class:`!Cursor` creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      when the :class:`!Cursor` was created.
```

IMO, this wording is more direct and straightforward and easier to parse, likely particularly so for non-native readers.

      including :abbr:`CTE (Common Table Expression)` queries.
      It is only updated by the :meth:`execute` and :meth:`executemany` methods.

   .. attribute:: row_factory

      Control how a row fetched from this :class:`!Cursor` is represented.
      If ``None``, a row is represented as a :class:`tuple`.
      Can be set to the included :class:`sqlite3.Row`;
      or a :term:`callable` that accepts two arguments,
      a :class:`Cursor` object and the :class:`!tuple` of row values,

>       and returns a custom object representing an SQLite row.

Reviewer 3: I think this part could be removed, especially if `Connection.row_factory` is preferred.

IOW I would mimic the suggested phrasing of `Connection.row_factory` and say that:
* you can assign a callable
* the default value is `None`, which returns a `tuple`
* other cursors (for `Connection.row_factory`) and the parent connection (for `Cursor.row_factory`) are not affected
* there is an howto with more info

Then in the howto you can show how to assign an existing callable (e.g. `Row`) or how to define your own (and what args it should accept) and provide more info and examples.

Reviewer: > I think this part could be removed, especially if Connection.row_factory is preferred.

FYI, at least per the previous discussion on this PR, Erlend considered here in the `Cursor` rather than the `Connection` as the canonical place to document this attribute, and thus the description in the latter was pared down to just the bare essentials, the Connection-specific parts and a link to here and the how-to. On the other hand, Erlend later does recommend setting it on the `Connection` when practical to apply to all `Cursor`s created from it. @erlend-aasland what do you think?

> IOW I would mimic the suggested phrasing of Connection.row_factory

See above for comments on the suggested phrasing in the context of an API reference

> the default value is None, which returns a tuple

I thought about that, but this isn't the default value, no? The default value when the Cursor is created is whatever `Connection.row_factory` is set to, as this section currently states?

> Then in the howto you can show how to assign an existing callable (e.g. Row) or how to define your own (and what args it should accept) and provide more info and examples.

IMO, while we certainly want to avoid duplication where practical, it seems to me that the Reference should still be a sufficiently complete and self-contained _description_ of the key _information_ about the API being documented. A how-to guide is the place to walk the reader through _doing specific tasks_ with it (and a tutorial for _learning_ how to use it), but the reader should not be required to dig through either to extract key details of the API itself, as opposed to just _consulting_ the reference. Per Diataxis, emphasis mine: "Technical reference has one job: to describe, and to do that clearly, accurately and **comprehensively**. "

In this case, I at least would consider a one-line statement of the basic purpose of the attribute to be key reference information. Likewise, I'd also consider the signature and return type of the custom callable the user must set it to as such, without which the reader cannot correctly use this attribute.

Author: Yes, this was already discussed above. Here's my reasoning for the current layout:

As per Diataxis, the reference should be accurate and to the point; it should avoid conversations and digressions. It should describe, not explain. We should also avoid duplication, as far as possible.

`Connection.row_factory` has one job: it provides the initial `Cursor.row_factory` for cursors created from the connection.
The `Connection.row_factory` reference should explain this, and only this. It should also link to `Cursor.row_factory` and to the row factory how-to.

`Cursor.row_factory`, on the other hand, performs the work of adapting "row tuples" to custom objects, if set. If `None`, there is no row factory; rows are returned as tuples. If not `None`, it must be set to a callable with a specific argument spec. The `Cursor.row_factory` reference should explain all these things. It should also link to `Connection.row_factory` and to the row factory how-to.

I'm not sure it is a problem that we recommend setting the row factory on the connection object instead of on cursors. Also, I think there is a slight difference in the words "recommend" and "prefer". We recommend setting row factory on the connection, because it is practical for the user. We could rephrase that sentence, but I'm afraid it would quickly become too verbose.

> IOW I would mimic the suggested phrasing of `Connection.row_factory` and say that:
> * you can assign a callable

Yep, and we already say that :)

> * the default value is `None`, which returns a `tuple`

The initial / default value is whatever the parent Connection `row_factory` is.

> * other cursors (for `Connection.row_factory`) and the parent connection (for `Cursor.row_factory`) are not affected

We already say that the parent connection is not affected. I'm not sure it is worth it saying that other cursors are not affected. IMO that's implicit, since this is a normal attribute, not a class variable.

> * there is an howto with more info

We also say that ;)

Author: I believe we can resolve this conversation. Shout out if you disagree :)

      including :abbr:`CTE (Common Table Expression)` queries.
      It is only updated by the :meth:`execute` and :meth:`executemany` methods.

   .. attribute:: row_factory

      This attribute is copied from :attr:`Connection.row_factory`
      upon :class:`!Cursor` creation.
      Assigning to this attribute does not affect the original

>       connection :attr:`!row_factory`.

Reviewer: I suggest a few further additions:

* The current text does not actually make fully clear that changing this attribute _will_ change the row factory used for this specific cursor. I suggest stating what this attribute _does_ do explicitly.
* It might also be worth adding that changing the original connection's `row_factory` also does not change the cursor's, after it is created.

>    Two row objects compare equal if have equal columns and equal members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Two row objects compare equal if they have equal columns and equal members.
```

Opportunistically fix a typo

Author: Hey, you introduced that one! 😆

>    See :ref:`sqlite3-row-factory-how-to` for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   See :ref:`sqlite3-howto-row-factory` for more details.
```

See rationale in ref target label definition

   It supports iteration, equality testing, :func:`len`,
   and :term:`mapping` access by column name and index.

   Two :class:`!Row` objects compare equal

>    if they have equal columns and equal members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   if they have the identical columns and values.
```

* "Values" is, I think, a more specific and appropriate word here, since a member of a named tuple includes both its names and its values, and is a more abstract and less commonly understood concept than the values in each column/of each member.
* At least to me as a native speaker, "equal columns" to me implies more an equal _number_ of columns, since "equal" is generally mostly reserved for numeric quantities, as opposed to _identical_ which seems to more closely match the intended meaning here (that the column names and order are the same).
* Avoid repeating the verb three times—I thought about saying "equal values", but the fact that a different word is used for each seems to me to imply that the equivalence testing is different between columns and values, (i.e. one is identity and one is equality), when AFAIK it is not. Most other words I tried were not strong or clear enough.

Author: +1, but I find the added _the_ off-kilter. Why not this?

```suggestion
   if they have identical columns and values.
```

Reviewer: I'll get to reviewing and responding to the rest of it shortly, but yeah the definite article was an editing typo here, sorry :+1:

   It supports iteration, equality testing, :func:`len`,
   and :term:`mapping` access by column name and index.

>    Two row objects compare equal if they have equal columns and equal members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Two :class:`!Row` objects compare equal
   if they have equal columns and equal members.
```

We really should clarify this is referring to objects of the `Row` class and use the appropriate markup, rather than just arbitrary row-like objects.

   It supports iteration, equality testing, :func:`len`,
   and :term:`mapping` access by column name and index.

   Two :class:`!Row` objects compare equal

>    if they have identical columns and values.

Reviewer: If the `Row` objects were from different DBs that happened to have the same selected column names, would they compare equal? If so, then would

```suggestion
   if they have identical column names and values.
```

be more accurate?

Author: Different databases does not matter; column names are compared first, then the tuples with the raw row results. So, yeah, this is more accurate. Thanks!

.. _SQLite URI documentation: https://www.sqlite.org/uri.html

> .. _sqlite3-row-factory-how-to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _sqlite3-howto-row-factory:
```

Tiny nitpick, but you might want to consider following the document hierarchy with the ref target label, as we do elsewhere, and keeping `howto` as one atomic unit of the label, and consistent with the `howto` directory name.

> How to work with row factories
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Author: Perhaps this is better:

```suggestion
How to use row factories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Reviewer: I'd suggest

```suggestion
How to create and use row factories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

since this section discussing not only _using_ row factories, but also _creating_ them.

By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` represent fetched rows as :class:`tuples <tuple>`.
If a :class:`!tuple` does not suit your needs,

> use the built-in :class:`Row` type or a custom :attr:`~Connection.row_factory`.

Reviewer 2: Not sure about `built-in` here

Author: I remember discussing that wording with CAM and Ezio in a previous sqlite3 docs PR, and for some reason we stuck to "built-in". I'll see if I can dig up that conversation. **EDIT** I give up searching; we've done so many PRs and we've had so many discussions about different wordings :)

Author: I can see that "built-in" _may_ cause confusion. I'm not sure there's a good drop-in replacement word, but I'll try to reformulate that whole sentence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use the :class:`Row` class provided by the module or a custom :attr:`~Connection.row_factory`.
```

Reviewer: Yeah, I can't remember that conversation off the top of my head, but I agree we shouldn't mix terminology like this.

However, instead of a rather wordy clarification, you could instead just include the module name in the reference title, which is more direct and concise. I'd also be consistent and specific, and call it a "class" rather than a generic type. So:

```suggestion
use the :class:`sqlite3.Row` class or a custom :attr:`~Connection.row_factory`.
```

Author: > I'd also be consistent and specific, and call it a "class" rather than a generic type.

+1

> The former provides both indexed and case-insensitive named access to columns,

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:class:`!Row` provides both indexed and case-insensitive named access to columns,
```

IMO, this flows better and is cleaner as a separate paragraph, explicitly restating the name of the class in question rather than referring to it indirectly.

FYI, if you apply this suggestion directly, you'll need to add the line break manually, since GitHub strips white space around suggestions and I couldn't span it to the previous line as I would normally without conflicting with that suggestion.

with low memory overhead and minimal performance impact.

> Example use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

Since this is prose, rather than a reference

.. doctest::

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = sqlite3.Row
   >>> res = con.execute("SELECT 'Earth' AS name, 6378 AS radius")
   >>> row = res.fetchone()
   >>> row.keys()
   ['name', 'radius']

>    >>> row[0], row["name"]  # Access by index and name.

Reviewer 2: index or name ?

Author: Access by index and access by name; it's both.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I meant: say `Access by index or name`, not `and` (it’s either 🙂)

Author: Hm, I think that depends on how you view it 😉 The first element of the tuple comes from indexed access and the second element comes from access by name.

Author: However, I'm not sure it matters much. I'm sure the message gets through no matter the conjunction; I'm fine with either.

Reviewer: I find @merwok 's version clearer; access by index _and_ name could be read to imply that both can or must be used together, whereas it is an (exclusive) or—only one can be used at a time. Using "or" avoids this potential ambiguity, and is AFAIK more idiomatic for this usage.

As an actual suggestion:

```suggestion
   >>> row[0], row["name"]  # Access by index or name.
```

Also, though it was slightly confusing to me that these two were in a tuple on first reading rather than as separate lines with separate outputs (as they would be used in reality), which would make the above clearer, IMO.

Author: > Also, though it was slightly confusing to me that these two were in a tuple on first reading rather than as separate lines with separate outputs (as they would be used in reality), which would make the above clearer, IMO.

Yes, I thought about that yesterday; it is a weird example using a tuple like this. I think I'll resolve it by putting them on separate lines.

   ('Earth', 'Earth')
   >>> row["RADIUS"]  # Column names are case-insensitive.
   6378

> If you need more flexibility, you can design your own row factory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need more flexibility, you can implement your own row factory.
```

Maybe personal preference, but I find "implement" clearer and more specific here, since the user isn't just designing the row factory but implementing it, and it also reflects the terminology of "implementing" a protocol or ABC.

> Here's an example of a :class:`dict` row factory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's an example of one returning a :class:`dict`:
```

* Clarify the relationship between the row factory and the `dict` (the previous wording I read to imply the factory itself was a `dict` subclass)
* Avoid repetition of "row factory"

Author: Indeed better

.. doctest::

   >>> def dict_factory(cursor, row):
   ...     col_names = [col[0] for col in cursor.description]
   ...     return {key: value for key, value in zip(col_names, row)}

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = dict_factory
   >>> for row in con.execute("SELECT 1 AS a, 2 AS b"):
   ...     print(row)
   {'a': 1, 'b': 2}

Here's an example of a optimised :class:`~collections.namedtuple` factory:

.. testcode::

   from collections import namedtuple
   from functools import lru_cache

>    def _fields(cursor):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   def _get_fields(cursor):
```

Wouldn't `_get_fields` be more idiomatic here and consistent with PEP 8, since function names should be verbs describing the action the function performs, rather than nouns? It also avoids any confusion with the `fields` parameter to `_make_cls`.

Author: Sure, I'm fine with that :)

        return (col[0] for col in cursor.description)

>    @lru_cache

Reviewer: IMO, it would be helpful for newer users to have a comment here briefly summarizing how this optimization works, if its not described in the introductory prose.

Author: That's a good point, and I think we should go a little bit further: this example does not need to be optimised; it should be to the point. It is better to add the optimisation afterwards, perhaps just as prose. Something like...:

_"As an optimisation, decorate `_make_cls` with `functools.lru_cache` to avoid creating named tuples with the same column spec. See `functools.lru_cache` for more details."_

Author: (FYI, I haven't added the above yet.)

Author: FYI, I've added a sentence about this in the latest commit.

   def _make_cls(fields):
       return namedtuple("Row", fields)

>    def NamedTupleFactory(cursor, row):

Author: Its probably a better idea to use snake case here:

```suggestion
   def namedtuple_factory(cursor, row):
```

>        cls = _make_cls(_fields(cursor))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       cls = _make_cls(_get_fields(cursor))
```

To match above

>        return cls._make(row)

Reviewer: Is it not possible to avoid using a "private" API of `namedtuple` here?

Author: AFAICS, that's the recommended API: https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html#collections.somenamedtuple._make

Reviewer: Oh, I see—it was named that way to avoid clashing with field names, I presume, though modern convention for this would be using an underscore at the end (`.make_`) rather than the beginning, to avoid conflating it with the convention for "private".

> Example use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``namedtuple_factory`` implemented above can be used as follows:
```

Be more explicit about what the example is of, and more prosaic

Author: Hm... how about this?

```suggestion
:func:`!namedtuple_factory` can be used as follows:
```

Author: PTAL

Reviewer: Hmm, yeah I thought about that but ultimately didn't do it at the time; I've gone back and forth on whether functions, classes, etc. from examples should be semantically marked up as those (unresolved) objects, or just as a code literal. On one hand, they aren't referring to functions, etc. of Python itself, as opposed to those in examples. On the other, semantically they are still a reference to the name of a function, as opposed to an arbitrary code sample.

Even while typing this I was wavering back and forth, and maybe we should have a broader conversation about this elsewhere, but its really not _that_ important and what you suggested is the convention you and I both have used elsewhere in this doc, so for now it seems to make sense to be consistent, at least, unless/unless we decide to change it.

Author: +1

.. doctest::

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")

>    >>> con.row_factory = NamedTupleFactory

Author: Ditto

```suggestion
   >>> con.row_factory = namedtuple_factory
```

.. _SQLite URI documentation: https://www.sqlite.org/uri.html

.. _sqlite3-howto-row-factory:

How to create and use row factories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` represent fetched rows as :class:`tuples <tuple>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` represents fetched rows as :class:`tuple`\s.
```

* Fix grammar
* Fix display of class name (as currently it is displayed as the _literal_ `tuples`, which is not the literal class name.

Or, you could do

```suggestion
By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` represents each fetched row as a :class:`tuple`.
```

Reviewer 2: IME using escaped-slash-then-letters is older and clumsier (to write and to read, with change of font stye mid-word) than ```:role:`text <ref>` ```

It is fine to have `tuples` in the code/class markup.

Reviewer: Yes, the appearance is not ideal, something which I almost made an explicit note of above. However, using custom text that is neither code nor a literal, yet gets rendered as such (`tuples` rather than `tuple`s) is neither semantically correct nor consistent with how code literal formatting is used everywhere else. At least in my view, clarity, consistency and correctness trumps aesthetic preference.

Also, `tuple`s is also consistent with the syntax used elsewhere in the `sqlite3` docs, and what I've generally seen in use elsewhere in the Python docs these days for literal cross-reference roles (though that latter is purely anecdotal). Its also more concise to read and write in the source.

Furthermore, it seems a moot point, as I presented an equivalent alternative that avoids this issue entirely.

> older 

Do you mean that support for explicit (custom) titles for Sphinx domain references was not implemented when they were first introduced? I'm not really sure how that would be germane here...

Reviewer 2: I understood the points you made in your first paragraph in your previous message, no need to insist at length!
My message expresses disagreement with these points 🙂  I truly believe there is no problem or confusion created by seeing `tuples` in code or function/class reference markup.  Absolute purity of perfect markup is not a goal without concrete benefits!

P2: internal consistency can be a point, but other instances can also be replaced if different markup is judged better.
For this case, it seems fine to keep the slightly ugly markup with `\ s` then [edit: this includes `\s`].

P3: yes I have a memory of custom titles not being supported by all roles, or maybe it was that python-dev didn’t know about it and we found `\ s` unsatisfying (clumsy to write and inelegant output) and were then happy to see the cleaner `text that you want in context <ref-target>`.  Maybe it wasn’t the whole python-dev but just some of us!

Reviewer: Well, my message was expressing disagreement with your message expressing disagreement with my points  :slightly_smiling_face: , but you're right, its better to just agree to disagree, and leave Erlend to decide. Sorry if I came off as too argumentative, and thanks for being kind about it!

> P2: internal consistency can be a point, but other instances can also be replaced if different markup is judged better.

That's quite true, yeah (though perhaps a little out of scope of this PR).

>  For this case, it seems fine to keep the slightly ugly markup with \ s then.

What do you think about the other suggestion that avoids it?

> were then happy to see the cleaner text that you want in context <ref-target>.

Yeah, the only issue here for me is the `literal` formatting (which is a problem for other custom titles that aren't a literal/code). It might be ideal with these roles offered some per-usage way of triggering not using literal formatting when an explicit title is passed, like `~` and `!` do for other things.

> or maybe it was that python-dev didn’t know about it 

BTW on that note,, I didn't know this for a while myself, but you can do `\s` rather than `\ s`. Doesn't change the output, but at least it saves you a character.

I _believe_ may actually be [an experimental docutils mode](https://github.com/docutils/docutils/blob/bc9bf5fc2c7f905507a49e8e37c12368c2f4a0cc/docutils/docutils/parsers/rst/__init__.py#L138) that actually allows you to do `` :class:`tuple`s ``, though it runs the risk of requiring escaping for special characters more places in plain text (and I'm not sure if its usable nowadays with Sphinx).

Reviewer 2: For the alternate suggestion, I do like `as a tuple` but am not a fan of the circumvolution `each fetched row` 🙂 

I’ll also leave Erlend to be the judge!

Author: - I'll got at lengths to avoid the ugly markup (`\ s`)
- IMO using `tuples <tuple>` is probably not a real problem for our average docs reader/consumer
- I think CAMs second suggestion is a very nice solution, so I'll use that and resolve this conversation :)

Reviewer: > I'll got at lengths to avoid the ugly markup (\ s)

Just FYI, not that it makes a _huge_ difference, but the sequence in question is just `\s`, not `\ s` (you can escape the `s` directly without an intervening space, which makes it a little less ugly and awkward, at least in the source). Mentioning this again since it seems to be a common misconception (which until relatively recently I had myself).

If a :class:`!tuple` does not suit your needs,
use the :class:`sqlite3.Row` class or a custom :attr:`~Connection.row_factory`.

:class:`!Row` provides indexed and case-insensitive named access to columns,
with low memory overhead and minimal performance impact.

> In order to use :class:`Row` as a row factory,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to use :class:`!Row` as a row factory,
```

simply assign it to the :attr:`Connection.row_factory` attribute:

.. doctest::

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = sqlite3.Row

> Query results are now processed using :class:`Row`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Query results are now returned as :class:`!Row` instances:
```

.. doctest::

   >>> res = con.execute("SELECT 'Earth' AS name, 6378 AS radius")
   >>> row = res.fetchone()
   >>> row.keys()
   ['name', 'radius']
   >>> row[0]  # Access by index.
   'Earth'
   >>> row["name"]    # Access by name.
   'Earth'
   >>> row["RADIUS"]  # Column names are case-insensitive.
   6378

It is also possible to assign row factories to cursors using
:attr:`Cursor.row_factory`:

.. doctest::

   >>> cur = con.cursor()
   >>> cur.row_factory == con.row_factory
   True

>    >>> cur.row_factory = None  # Override cursor row factory.

Reviewer: At least initially, I found it a bit hard to follow here that the cursor row factory was being set to `None` and then had the default behavior, at least without more explicit comments.

Also, it might make more sense to move this example to after the example of the custom connection factory, to avoid splitting up the two different things you can set `row_factory` to with an example that's quite different. You could also use that to provide an example of a `row_factory` that is itself a class rather than a function.

Author: I'll rework this example completely. Let's see how it turns out.

Author: I decided to ditch this example after rewriting the row factory references. If you still think this example is needed, we may consider adding a minimal version to the reference instead.

   # The cursor and the connection row factories now differ.
   >>> cur.row_factory == con.row_factory
   False
   >>> cur.execute("SELECT 'Hello'").fetchone()
   ('Hello',)

   # The connection still uses sqlite3.Row, as set in the previous example.
   >>> con.execute("SELECT 'Hello'").fetchone()
   <sqlite3.Row object at ...>

If more flexibility is needed, implement a custom row factory.

> Here's an example of one returning a :class:`dict`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to return a :class:`dict`:
```

Avoid repeating the same phrasing twice in consecutive introduction lines

Reviewer 2: IMO «example of one [row factory] returning a dict» is more concrete and understandable than «how to return a dict»

Reviewer: Okay, sure; I wasn't 100% solid on this one. I'll suggest a change to the other one instead.

Author: I'm fine with either, and I think the message gets through in both variations. If both of you care strongly for one particular variant, I'll gladly change it.

.. doctest::

   >>> def dict_factory(cursor, row):
   ...     col_names = [col[0] for col in cursor.description]
   ...     return {key: value for key, value in zip(col_names, row)}

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = dict_factory
   >>> for row in con.execute("SELECT 1 AS a, 2 AS b"):
   ...     print(row)
   {'a': 1, 'b': 2}

> Here's an example of a factory that return a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's an example of a factory that returns a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.
```

Grammar fix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following row factory returns a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.
```

To avoid repeating nearly verbatim the same phrase, changed from the above.

.. testcode::

   from collections import namedtuple

   def _get_fields(cursor):
        return (col[0] for col in cursor.description)

>    def _make_cls(fields):
>        return namedtuple("Row", fields)
> 
>    def namedtuple_factory(cursor, row):
>        cls = _make_cls(_get_fields(cursor))

Reviewer: Since this boilerplate has little to do with the task at hand, and rather distracts and may make the reader wonder if this structure has some significance to `sqlite3` (as I did initially), I'd suggest simplifying this to just

```suggestion
   def namedtuple_factory(cursor, row):
       cls = namedtuple("Row", _get_fields(cursor))
```

Reviewer: It does make describing the suggested optimization below less trivial, but as that is an optimization exercise for the reader and orthogonal to the `sqlite3` itself, my opinion would be that its not worth the complexity and confusion cost of adding it here just to make the optimization easier.

Something something something premature optimization is the root of all eval... :laughing:

Author: True! Let's keep it to the point.

Here's an example of one returning a :class:`dict`:

.. doctest::

   >>> def dict_factory(cursor, row):
   ...     col_names = [col[0] for col in cursor.description]
   ...     return {key: value for key, value in zip(col_names, row)}

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = dict_factory
   >>> for row in con.execute("SELECT 1 AS a, 2 AS b"):
   ...     print(row)
   {'a': 1, 'b': 2}

Here's an example of a factory that return a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.

.. testcode::

   from collections import namedtuple

   def _get_fields(cursor):
        return (col[0] for col in cursor.description)

   def _make_cls(fields):
       return namedtuple("Row", fields)

   def namedtuple_factory(cursor, row):
       cls = _make_cls(_get_fields(cursor))
       return cls._make(row)

:func:`!namedtuple_factory` can be used as follows:

.. doctest::

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = namedtuple_factory
   >>> cur = con.execute("SELECT 1 AS a, 2 AS b")
   >>> row = cur.fetchone()
   >>> row
   Row(a=1, b=2)
   >>> row[0]  # Indexed access.
   1
   >>> row.b   # Attribute access.
   2

> As an optimisation, decorate :func:`!_make_cls` with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an optimisation, :func:`!_make_cls` can be decorated with
```

On first read, I wasn't totally sure if that was referring to something that _was_ done above (in traditional imperative style), or something it was being suggested that the reader _could_ do. This clarifies that.

> :func:`!functools.lru_cache` to avoid creating multiple named tuples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:func:`!functools.lru_cache` to avoid creating multiple :class:`!namedtuple`\s
```

Clarify that this is the `namedtuple` class, not just a `tuple` that has a name.

Reviewer 2: Is this the first time named tuples are mentioned?  Is it a real worry that people will not know about collections.namedtuple but imagine a concept of tuple that has a name?

If namedtuple was already linked before, then the previous markup was fine IMO.  If it’s the first time, we have ``` :term:`named tuple` ``` to link to glossary.

Reviewer: > Is this the first time named tuples are mentioned?

No, otherwise I wouldn't have added `!` :)

> Is it a real worry that people will not know about collections.namedtuple but imagine a concept of tuple that has a name?

Probably not—as you point out, that wasn't a very good reason, heh.

Your reference to the [glossary entry](https://docs.python.org/3.12/glossary.html#term-named-tuple) (that I forgot existed) helps clarify the distinction here between "named tuples" and the `collections.namedtuple` class factory. The former are defined there as any objects that inherent from tuple and offer attribute access to named fields, which may be created manually, via `collections.namedtuple`, or other means.

Here we're specifically using the latter, and the cost in question is not that of creating multiple _instances_ of named tuple objects, but rather calling `collections.namedtuple` multiple times to construct the class for the named tuples. Also, the defining feature of named tuples mentioned there (access by attribute) is not actually demonstrated in the examples.

With that in mind, this can be revised to reflect this, as well as further clarify the effect.

```suggestion
:func:`functools.lru_cache` to avoid calling :func:`collections.namedtuple`
many times with the same row schema.
```

Reviewer 3: It's mentioned at line 2412.  In general I would be a bit more lenient with the use of `!` -- unless there is another link in the immediate vicinity, I would avoid adding it, and it's probably better to have an extra link than not having one.

Maybe in the rendered HTML it's easier to spot, but I haven't seen a link to `lru_cache`.  An advantage of using the link is also that you can use `` :func:`~functools.lru_cache` `` and hide the module, since the link will already bring the user to the right page.

Reviewer: Thanks. I ensured `collections.namedtuple` is linked, since the last place it is mentioned is above the example block. IIRC there was a link to `functools.lru_cache` above the example, but that was removed when that optimization was removed from the given example in the most recent revision, and we missed removing the `!` here, thanks. I've edited my suggestion to fix that.

> with identical column spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with identical column specs.
```

Fix grammar

> with identical column spec.

Reviewer: You'll need to adjust this paragraph some if you go with the simplification I suggest above.

Author: I'm not sure yet what to do with this paragraph post the above simplification.

Reviewer: Yeah, I wasn't quite sure either—its a bit complicated to explain in detail after that change.

   'Earth'
   >>> row["name"]    # Access by name.
   'Earth'
   >>> row["RADIUS"]  # Column names are case-insensitive.
   6378

It is also possible to assign row factories to cursors using
:attr:`Cursor.row_factory`:

.. doctest::

   >>> cur = con.cursor()
   >>> cur.row_factory == con.row_factory
   True
   >>> cur.row_factory = None  # Override cursor row factory.

   # The cursor and the connection row factories now differ.
   >>> cur.row_factory == con.row_factory
   False
   >>> cur.execute("SELECT 'Hello'").fetchone()
   ('Hello',)

   # The connection still uses sqlite3.Row, as set in the previous example.
   >>> con.execute("SELECT 'Hello'").fetchone()
   <sqlite3.Row object at ...>

If more flexibility is needed, implement a custom row factory.
Here's an example of one returning a :class:`dict`:

.. doctest::

   >>> def dict_factory(cursor, row):
   ...     col_names = [col[0] for col in cursor.description]
   ...     return {key: value for key, value in zip(col_names, row)}

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = dict_factory
   >>> for row in con.execute("SELECT 1 AS a, 2 AS b"):
   ...     print(row)
   {'a': 1, 'b': 2}

> The following row factory returns a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.

Reviewer 2: Minot thing: in this instance, I would want to read `returns a named tuple`.

Contrary to one-word names like `defaultdict`, named tuple is a concept, or a sort of classes, not a specific class.
(There is a little ambiguity about whether `a named tuple` means the created class or an instance of it, but it does not matter I think — people will understand the example just fine.)

So I think ``` :class:`named tuple <collections.namedtuple>` ``` or ``` :term:`named tuple` ``` would read better here, and not be technically incorrect at all.

Reviewer: Yup, great point. Following our previous discussion, this should instead point to the glossary entry you mentioned. Also, it should end with a colon rather than a period (full stop). Thus:

```suggestion
The following row factory returns a :term:`named tuple`:
```

Reviewer: Not sure if this was missed, or was made locally but not pushed like the other changes?

Author: Thanks, missed it!

Reviewer: I was a little hesitant about "crying wolf" after the last two times, hehe

.. _SQLite URI documentation: https://www.sqlite.org/uri.html

.. _sqlite3-howto-row-factory:

How to create and use row factories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` represents each fetched row as a :class:`tuple`.
If a :class:`!tuple` does not suit your needs,

> use the :class:`sqlite3.Row` class or a custom :attr:`~Cursor.row_factory`.

Reviewer: Initially, I was going to suggest stating more directly _how_ to use these (i.e. something like "set the `row_factory` attribute to `Row` or a custom row factory."), since reading it I was a little confused that I was being told to use something without being given the actionable information of _how_ to actually do that.

However, considering the next sentence where you describe where to set this, it seems to makes sense to hold off on stating this directly. Therefore, to avoid inducing any premature user confusion, I suggest rewording this to inform users that that using another row factory is an option, as opposed to directly telling them to do so.

```suggestion
you can use the :class:`sqlite3.Row` class
or a custom :attr:`~Cursor.row_factory`.
```

> Even though :attr:`!row_factory` exists as an attribute both on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While :attr:`!row_factory` exists as an attribute both on the
```

IMO, "while" is a bit more appropriate here and comes off as a bit gentler

:class:`Cursor` and the :class:`Connection`,

> it is recommended to set it as :class:`Connection.row_factory`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is recommended to set :class:`Connection.row_factory`,
```

A bit clearer (since they aren't direct aliases, as the "set it as" idiom tends to imply), more direct and more concise

> so all cursors created off of the connection will use the same row factory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so all cursors created from the connection will use the same row factory.
```

Like above, "from" is a bit clearer and more direct IMO, particularly I'd think for non-native-level speakers

:class:`!Row` provides indexed and case-insensitive named access to columns,

> with low memory overhead and minimal performance impact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with minimal memory overhead and performance impact over a raw :class:`tuple`.
```

* Explicitly clarify what the memory overhead and performance impact are relative to.

Author: Maybe drop "raw" here.

Author: Also, maybe deliberately not link to `tuple`, since we did so recently.

Reviewer: :+1:

> In order to use :class:`!Row` as a row factory,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use :class:`!Row` as a row factory,
```

More concise and direct without any loss of intended meaning

simply assign it to the :attr:`Connection.row_factory` attribute:

.. doctest::

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = sqlite3.Row

Query results are now returned as :class:`!Row` instances:

.. doctest::

   >>> res = con.execute("SELECT 'Earth' AS name, 6378 AS radius")
   >>> row = res.fetchone()
   >>> row.keys()
   ['name', 'radius']

>    >>> row[0]  # Access by index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >>> row[0]         # Access by index.
```

If you're going to line the others up rather than using two spaces, seems like you should line this one up too, especially since the close parallel is between this one and the next.

How to create and use row factories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` represents each fetched row as a :class:`tuple`.

Reviewer: @merwok , do you like it better without "fetched"?

```suggestion
By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` represents each row as a :class:`tuple`.
```

Author: I think we should consider leaving it in place. It is slightly more explicit with "fetched" than without. An alternative might have been "resulting rows", but "fetched rows" is better, IMO.

Reviewer: Yeah; just to be clear, I don't have a particular preference—I was just presenting this as an option as @merwok had previously mentioned he wasn't a huge fan of the current construction here.

FWIW, "resulting rows" wouldn't really address that, if I'm understanding his concern correctly, and to me would be unclear and out of place, since it is never stated or even directly implied what specific action these rows are "resulting" _from_ (whereas fetched is much less semantically dependent in this fashion, and readers can reasonably infer it they are fetched from the DB or some variation thereof).

Author: After thinking about this, I agree that it sounds better without _fetched_, so I'll apply this suggestion as well.

.. _SQLite URI documentation: https://www.sqlite.org/uri.html

.. _sqlite3-howto-row-factory:

How to create and use row factories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` represents each row as a :class:`tuple`.
If a :class:`!tuple` does not suit your needs,
you can use the :class:`sqlite3.Row` class
or a custom :attr:`~Cursor.row_factory`.

While :attr:`!row_factory` exists as an attribute both on the
:class:`Cursor` and the :class:`Connection`,
it is recommended to set :class:`Connection.row_factory`,
so all cursors created from the connection will use the same row factory.

:class:`!Row` provides indexed and case-insensitive named access to columns,
with minimal memory overhead and performance impact over a :class:`!tuple`.
To use :class:`!Row` as a row factory,

> simply assign it to the :attr:`Connection.row_factory` attribute:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
assign it to the :attr:`!Connection.row_factory` attribute:
```

* "Simply" doesn't really add anything to the meaning, and can sometimes send the wrong message to readers; see https://github.com/python/peps/pull/2900#discussion_r1030249682 for some recent discussion and links about that (where it was pointed out in my own writing—funny enough, I'd actually though about commenting on it here, but didn't end up doing so).
* This was already referenced earlier in the paragraph, so de-resolve it

.. doctest::

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = sqlite3.Row

> Query results are now returned as :class:`!Row` instances:

Reviewer 3: I initially misread `Query` as a verb, so maybe it could be rephrased as:
```suggestion
Queries will now return :class:`!Row` instances:
```
or
```suggestion
The results of the queries will now be :class:`!Row` instances:
```

Reviewer 2: or
```suggestion
Results from queries are now returned as :class:`!Row` instances:
```

Reviewer: or

```suggestion
Results from queries will now be returned as :class:`!Row` instances:
```

(Of the other options, I like @ezio-melotti 's first option the most, perhaps more than my own here as its shorter; I preferred @merwok 's with the future perfect (i.e. my suggestion) as opposed to the present progressive, and IMO the second suggestion is rather harder for me to read and the definite articles seem out of place.)

Author: I also like Ezio's first suggestion. Perhaps even without "will":

```suggestion
Queries now return :class:`!Row` instances:
```

Also, while we're at it, possibly use "objects" instead of "instances":

```suggestion
Queries now return :class:`!Row` objects:
```

.. doctest::

   >>> res = con.execute("SELECT 'Earth' AS name, 6378 AS radius")
   >>> row = res.fetchone()
   >>> row.keys()
   ['name', 'radius']
   >>> row[0]         # Access by index.
   'Earth'
   >>> row["name"]    # Access by name.
   'Earth'
   >>> row["RADIUS"]  # Column names are case-insensitive.
   6378

> .. doctest::

Reviewer 3: I feel it would be better to draw a line here to distinguish between using existing/default factories, and defining custom ones.  In addition, I don

```suggestion
It is also possible to define a custom :attr:`~Connection.row_factory`
by specifying a :term:`callable` that accepts two arguments,
a :class:`Cursor` object and the :class:`!tuple` of row values,
and returns a custom object representing an SQLite row.

.. doctest::
```

Reviewer: Yeah, it _definitely_ needs _something_ here, as its otherwise rather confusing.

However, the information describing the API of the callable accepted should be (and currently is) described in the API reference, rather than here, Therefore, I would instead just introduce the actual example here, i,e, something like:

```suggestion
To create and use a custom :attr:`~Cursor.row_factory`,
in this case returning a :class:`dict` mapping column names to values:

.. doctest::
```

> In addition, I don

Master Qui-Gonn, more to say, have you?

Author: Yes, the description of the callable is already given in the reference. Also, a how-to is not a tutorial; let's try to keep it as short and to-the-point as possible.

I prefer CAMs suggestion.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` represents each row as a :class:`tuple`.
If a :class:`!tuple` does not suit your needs,
you can use the :class:`sqlite3.Row` class
or a custom :attr:`~Cursor.row_factory`.

While :attr:`!row_factory` exists as an attribute both on the
:class:`Cursor` and the :class:`Connection`,
it is recommended to set :class:`Connection.row_factory`,
so all cursors created from the connection will use the same row factory.

:class:`!Row` provides indexed and case-insensitive named access to columns,
with minimal memory overhead and performance impact over a :class:`!tuple`.
To use :class:`!Row` as a row factory,
assign it to the :attr:`!row_factory` attribute:

.. doctest::

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = sqlite3.Row

Queries now return :class:`!Row` objects:

.. doctest::

   >>> res = con.execute("SELECT 'Earth' AS name, 6378 AS radius")
   >>> row = res.fetchone()
   >>> row.keys()
   ['name', 'radius']
   >>> row[0]         # Access by index.
   'Earth'
   >>> row["name"]    # Access by name.
   'Earth'
   >>> row["RADIUS"]  # Column names are case-insensitive.
   6378

> To create and use a custom :attr:`~Cursor.row_factory`,
> in this case returning a :class:`dict` mapping column names to values:
> 
> .. doctest::
> 
>    >>> def dict_factory(cursor, row):
>    ...     col_names = [column[0] for column in cursor.description]
>    ...     return {key: value for key, value in zip(col_names, row)}
> 
>    >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
>    >>> con.row_factory = dict_factory
>    >>> for row in con.execute("SELECT 1 AS a, 2 AS b"):
>    ...     print(row)
>    {'a': 1, 'b': 2}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create a custom :attr:`~Cursor.row_factory`
that returns each row as a :class:`dict`, with column names mapped to values:

.. doctest::

   >>> def dict_factory(cursor, row):
   ...     col_names = [column[0] for column in cursor.description]
   ...     return {key: value for key, value in zip(col_names, row)}

Using it, queries now return a :class:`!dict` instead of a :class:`!tuple`:

.. doctest::

   >>> con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   >>> con.row_factory = dict_factory
   >>> for row in con.execute("SELECT 1 AS a, 2 AS b"):
   ...     print(row)
   {'a': 1, 'b': 2}
```

IMO, I didn't do a great job with the suggestion originally. This improves things:

* Frame the introduction more clearly, grammatically and appropriately
* Split the recipes into two parts with a short description of each, like the others

Author: Yep, splitting it in two is better. I'll remove the interactive prompt from the first block, though. IMO that makes the distinction between the recipe and the example usage clearer.

   ...     print(row)
   {'a': 1, 'b': 2}

The following row factory returns a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.

.. testcode::

   from collections import namedtuple

   def namedtuple_factory(cursor, row):

>        fields = [col[0] for col in cursor.description]

Reviewer: Since you have the space, maybe be a touch clearer with your variable names (especially for non-native speakers)?

```suggestion
       fields = [column[0] for column in cursor.description]
```

Author: Yes, that's better

Reviewer: And this one?

Author: Related:

We should enhance the `Cursor.description` reference a little bit. IMO, an example similar to the line in question could be of great help for beginners. We might tweak the current wording as well, but simply appending an example would be clarifying.

```vim
1546    .. attribute:: description
1547 
1548       Read-only attribute that provides the column names of the last query. To
1549       remain compatible with the Python DB API, it returns a 7-tuple for each
1550       column where the last six items of each tuple are ``None``.
1551 
1552       It is set for ``SELECT`` statements without any matching rows as well.
1553 
1554       To fetch all column names for the last query, extract the first of each 7-item tuple:
1555 
1556       .. testcode::
1557 
1558          names = [column[1] for column in cursor.description]
```

   >>> row.b   # Attribute access.
   2

With some adjustments, the above recipe can be adapted to use a
:class:`~dataclasses.dataclass`, or any other custom class,
instead of a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.

> As an exercise left for the reader, the above example can be optimised

Reviewer: Since this is a how-to, with the goal of telling a reader how to complete a task, as opposed to a tutorial with the primary aim of helping the reader learn, I'm not sure the "exercise for the reader" framing, which at least to me implies the latter and is generally associated with an academic/workshop/learning context, is a good fit here. Furthermore, IMO its not really necessary, and is more concise and direct without it. 

```suggestion
The above example can be optimised
```

Author: How about turning it into a footnote? Or dropping it entirely?

Reviewer: You mean this whole paragraph? Yeah, I'm fine with either, since to be honest its content seems mostly orthogonal to anything directly related to the module.

Its also unclear how practically impactful the optimization is in most situations; on Python 3.10 on a old laptop, running `collections.namedtuple('Row', [f'field{idx}' for idx in range(n_cols]` with `timeit`, I get a time of 199 us per execution for 10 cols, or 1.23 ms for 100 cols. This certainly isn't completely _trivial_, if its call in a tight hot loop, but seems unlikely to be the main critical path constraint in most real-world situations.

By contrast, even with a best-case toy example with a `:memory:` db and using constant SQL statements with no actual db access, running `con.execute("SELECT " + ', '.join([f'{idx} AS column{idx}' for idx in range(100)])).fetchone()` simulating an equivalent db with 100 rows takes 140 us per execution with the default tuple. Presumably, any real use case that needed to iterate through a large db would be substantially more costly.

Author: Oh, I'm pretty you'll find it has a performance impact ;) I'm totally fine with dropping it.

> by extracting to a new function the code that create the ``fields`` variable.
> Then decorate that new function with :func:`functools.lru_cache` to avoid
> creating multiple classes ``cls`` from identical column specs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by extracting the code that create the ``fields`` variable to a new function,
and decorating it with :func:`functools.lru_cache`.
This avoids creating multiple class:`~collections.namedtuple` classes
from identical column specs.
```

* Split the sentence at a more suitable point to avoid implying, as it does now, that pulling the code out to a function is the optimization, as opposed to using `functools.lru_cache`, and also cleanly separate the "how" from the "why" it works, and is also more concise overall.
* In the first line, flip the order to be more idiomatic and read more naturally in English
* In the second line, fix the verb form agreement (which previously mixed imperative with present participle).
* In the third line, fix the grammar/word order and refer specifically to the class factory (since we suggested replacing the reference above with the glossary term).

Author: Obsolete, as this is now removed.

   >>> row.b   # Attribute access.
   2

As an optimisation, decorate :func:`!_make_cls` with
:func:`!functools.lru_cache` to avoid creating multiple named tuples
with identical column spec.

> See :func:`functools.lru_cache` for more details.

Reviewer 3: Here is the link to `lru_cache`!  Since you have it here, then it's ok to use the `!` above, but also consider removing this sentence and just have the link above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I'd already added it above, and I also agree it is redundant to mention it again here, so this implements your recommendation of just eliding this line.

Author: Yes, I deliberately added the link because of the "See ... for more details" sentence[^1]. However, I'll reword this anyways.

[^1]: that sentence would have been very weird without a link...
